Making sense of Twitter

You know Twitter is "cool" when even Indian ministers start tweeting. OK, it might be just Shashi Tharoor for now but the simple fact that someone belonging to a largely tech-agnostic group of Indian politicians is on Twitter, speaks volumes of the popularity of this new service that has metamorphosed from a mere Web 2.0 service into something of a cultural rage, connecting the web and Blackberrys with its ingenious 140-character-long messages.

But Twitter's popularity is something well known. What we don't know for sure is why it is such a rage. The fact that it allows us to keep in touch with friends using internet even when we are not on the web is one reason why so many people have taken to it, especially the Blackberry crowd that has no time for full-fledged social networking of Facebook. But the phenomenon, especially on web where every day tens of new services are launched, is not just because of the sheer convenience or utility factor. Twitter has more to it than what meets the eye. Its 140-character-long messages, stacked on top of each other on a drab looking page, hide more than what even most of its users comprehend.

For sometime now, pundits, most of them over 40, have been complaining how the age of Google is making us all dumb by overloading us with information and robbing us of our ability to concentrate. It's turning us into e-junkies, they say, who keep on devouring every piece of information from a thousand and one sources but with little ability to retain and crunch this data. And for once these pundits may be right. But where they are wrong is in their prediction that this overdose of information will result in human beings losing their higher-function faculties and dumbing down en masse, evolving into a generation that can't memorize anything or create the complex work of literature, like say a 400-page novel with insomnia as its theme.

The way we process information is changing but it's just a simple evolutionary change, necessitated by the inevitable march of the technology. Twitter is one byproduct of this change and I have a feeling that it's just the beginning. Remember the good old diary, where we used to jot down our thoughts for the day before retiring to sleep. But the age of Qwerty has left the diary as our parents knew it way back behind in time. Now, the diary is Twitter and we don't wait for the sun to set to gather our thoughts and engrave them into the white sheets of the leatherbound book. Instead, we reach out to our keyboard or cellphone and tap into them the thoughts as they swirl inside the mind. It is the new way to organize information, to catch ideas as they rush past you as you sip coffee inside the boardroom waiting for the meeting to begin. And because we are children of Internet age, the time when information became free and voyeur lost its meaning, we do it in public and share it with friends, community and the world.

Twitter appeals to this generation because it allows them to think and accumulate their thoughts and present them in the way the web has taught them. Twitter is not perfect. As a service it needs some polishing and I have a feeling that its popularity notwithstanding, there is something that it lacks. Something sublime and vital that denied for too long may even kill it. But it is a step ahead as the Internet moves towards what Tim Berners Lee calls Semantic Web.

PS: There are some dangers of getting addicted to Twitter but they are not slowed cognitive functions, bad memory or loss of privacy (there is an inbuilt private mode in Twitter). Instead, addiction to Twitter may sometime result in a black eye, something that this British man found hard way