Google’s OS is no Windows killer

So, finally Google decided to take the plunge. Talk of an operating software (OS) from Google that will compete with Microsoft's Windows has been in the ‘Tech Ville’ for over four years but it never amounted to anything more than tongues wagging a geeky tale. On Tuesday, however, the tale came true, and even though it lacked the substance, it was enough to set the web and tech communities abuzz. “Google is going for Microsoft’s jugular,” one said, while another quipped, “it's death of Windows”. There were dissenting voices too as a few tried to look beyond the hyperbolic announcement at the official Google blog and came away disappointed by the lack of details about the program supposed to kill a product, however flawed, that has powered computers since 1985.

Now, don't get me wrong. I am excited by the announcement of a new OS and I have no love lost for Windows. But once you try to put Google’s Chrome OS in perspective, you will realize that for now it's more hype and less substance, not worthy of even the status of an OS, leave alone the tag of giant-slayer.

Chrome OS is not an OS in traditional sense. From what we know of it so far, you won't be able to install any third-party applications on it, the way you do on a regular computer. It will be just the Chrome OS and the web and nothing else; no email client or media player, and definitely not Microsoft Office, will come in between. Is Chrome OS still looking that hot?

Even in its single-minded pursuit, which is opening a ‘window’ to the web in a jiffy, Chrome OS will have its task cut out. For one, average users don’t like to venture into unfamiliar territory when it comes to OS. Linux distros are in existence for the last 20 years and some of them like Ubuntu and Mandriva are polished piece of software, capable of giving Windows a run for its money. But when netbooks, the small 9” to 11” laptops powered by CPUs like Intel's Atom and Via's Nano and the ones which Google will be targeting with its new OS, were shipped with such distros in 2008, many people preferred to pay $50 more and got the one with Windows XP on it. 

Somehow, even if Google can bring out a product simple enough to make people forget the ubiquitous yellow folders and a cluttered desktop of Windows, it will face challenges that are more real than just the perception. If Chrome OS has to find many takers, cloud computing will have to gain wider acceptance, something that I don’t see happening for at least three to four years more.

Cloud computing is a name for the standard where services will be delivered through the web and not based on the desktops. It's no secret that the web is Google's forte, and over the years, the company has built a repertoire of services on the internet that it says can satisfy the needs of most users. It offers document editor, accounting program, web-based photo sharing and a host of other services. Google is banking heavily on cloud computing for its future plans and Chrome OS is just one way towards realizing these plans. But for now, neither people nor the infrastructure is ready for the momentous shift in the way we use computers. People are still not comfortable with storing all their data on the web due to privacy and security concerns. Networks too are not ready for our always-on relationship with the web. Take for example a 2mbps internet connection offered by MTNL. It is one of the best that you can get in India as far as downloading stuff is concerned. But is it reliable? Not at all. It’s frustrating to access dynamic web services or playing real-time games on it. Its latency, the lag between command and execution, makes it even difficult to access websites like Gmail that need low-latency connection because of their use of AJAX or advance scripts.   

Chrome OS, if it is done right, will have a place for itself. But it won’t replace Windows, not in the near future at least. The best it can hope for is to gain enough acceptance so that it can survive as another OS by the side of Windows in double boot mode. If it’s as simple and secure as Google claims, it may make for a perfect companion to the more traditional OS, to be used for a quick getaway to the web when you are short on time and want nothing more than to check your emails or catch a buddy or two online.  

WebNotes: Google recently decided that Gmail, which completed five years this April, is stable enough to come out of beta. For most users, the move doesn’t make any difference but some nostalgic souls want their beta back. If you are one of those rooting for a rollback, mourn not much. Just click on Gmail settings while you are logged in the mail, go to Lab and enable the beta tag!