A Micro Four Third promise

The world of digital cameras, especially the mainstream ones, can be quite drab sometimes. In a bid to pip each other in the mega-pixel (MP) race, camera manufacturers have churned out products of such an average quality in the last couple of years that it is difficult to get excited about photography. It became clear long ago that MPs don't matter much for ordinary folks, but that did little to stop camera manufacturers from cramming more and more pixels into their devices and touting it as the key feature.

The results of the pixel mania are disastrous, to say the least, as far as photography is concerned. It has created a mainstream digital camera market that consists entirely of point-and-shoot cameras, different in just three aspects: physical appearance, MP count and price. This means that for all practical purposes a camera with 7MP that costs Rs 7,000 will more or less deliver the same photograph that can be obtained with a 12MP camera costing Rs 15,000. Both will be good for clicking snaps of your friends on a sunny afternoon, but try to play a little with light and shadow or use them to capture sublime colours of an evening, and both fail in equal measure.

Amateur photo enthusiasts who may not want to enter the realm of costly DSLRs have searched in vain for a decent digital camera that is easy to use, is powerful and doesn't cost a bomb. The biggest problem with mainstream cameras, nowadays, is that they have a tiny image sensor, arguably the most important component inside a camera after the lens. Even the expensive point-and-shoot cameras like Panasonic DMZ28 carry a 6.13mm x 4.60mm sensor, significantly smaller than sensors in a full-body DSLR like Canon ESO 5D (35.8mm x 23.9mm) or inside a Four Third DSLR like Nikon's D40 (23.6mm x 15.5mm).

The appalling lack of innovation in mainstream camera market is the reason why photo enthusiasts have greeted news about Olympus Pen E-P1with a lot of enthusiasm. Likely to be launched in July or early August, Pen E-P1 is based on the Micro Four Third standard that was developed by Olympus and Panasonic in August 2008. While Panasonic came out with its own Micro Four Third camera Lumix DMC-G1 in November last year, the offering from Olympus seems to be the one that has potential to tap into the promise offered by the new standard.

Micro Four Third cameras are supposed to offer best of both point-and-shoot and entry-level DSLRs. Olympus Pen EP1, with its retro design that borrows heavily from the famous Olympus Pen of 1960s, will offer an 18mm x 13.5mm sensor with 12.3 mega pixels in a (considerably) compact body and unlike DSLRs, will be easy to use, claims Olympus. As far as specifications go, Pen E-P1 seems to be hitting all the right notes by providing interchangeable lenses, ability to record 720P videos and other bells and whistles associated with high-end point-and-shoot cameras. The only concerns so far are over its supposed price (over $700) and lack of inbuilt flash (Olympus will sell a mountable flash as accessory).

But these are still early days for Micro Four Thirds and there is time to iron out flaws. The great thing about the new standard is its underlying promise, especially to amateur photographers. Once more camera manufacturers join the bandwagon, I am sure we will be in for some exciting time as far as photography as a hobby is concerned.

WebNote: It's funny to see how the smartest of people can, sometimes, harbour the stupidest of ideas about internet. Nicolas Sarkozy, after the three-strike law was almost annulled by France's highest law body, defended the government move over the legislation and said: “How can there be areas of lawlessness in areas of our society? How can one simultaneously claim that the economy is regulated but the internet is not so? How can we accept that the rules that apply to society as a whole are not binding on the internet?”

Much can be written on how Mr Sarkozy is mistaken in his views about the Web, but for now, it will be most appropriate to just quote from A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace:

Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather.

Governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. You have neither solicited nor received ours. We did not invite you. You do not know us, nor do you know our world. Cyberspace does not lie within your borders. Do not think that you can build it, as though it were a public construction project. You cannot. It is an act of nature and it grows itself through our collective actions…Your legal concepts of property, expression, identity, movement, and context do not apply to us. They are all based on matter, and there is no matter here.  (John Perry Barlow; February 8, 1996)