A faster and smarter Fox

Who would have thought that one day Firefox, the internet browser that took on the might of Microsoft and survived to change the rules of web browsing, will be playing catch up. But in the last couple of months this is exactly what has happened. The fiery Fox fell — only if marginally — behind the dashing Safari (http://www.apple.com/safari/), the versatile Opera (http://www.opera.com/browser/next/), a born-again Internet Explorer (http://www.microsoft.com/windows/internet-explorer/default.aspx) and the no-nonsense Chrome (http://www.google.com/chrome). Its Gecko engine was getting a little long in tooth, its feature set was oh-so archaic when compared to the likes of Opera and, worst of all, it was failing to get some decent score in Acid test (http://acid3.acidtests.org/). Firefox 3 was in need of some serious patching up.

Luckily, Mozilla's team of open source developers has some very bright people. This team went back to the drawing board and what was supposed to be an incremental update targeted to bring out Firefox 3.1, turned out to be a major rehaul, resulting in Firefox 3.5 (http://www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/upgrade.html), a browser that not only caught up with the much-celebrated Chrome in speed, but also, reminiscent of the old days, brought forth support for emerging web technologies. I am putting the browser through its paces since last Tuesday, the day it was launched, and here is how it stacks up against competition:

Speed: This is not to be confused with the time that a program takes to launch. Instead, it is the speed at which the browser renders a web page. The speed of rendering depends on the type of web page and the elements, like Java script and Flash, which are embedded in it. Chrome is still the undisputed king here, but with a new rendering engine in Gecko 1.9.1 (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gecko_%28layout_engine%29), the latest Firefox build matches Opera 10 and Safari in terms of speed. The difference between these four browsers is in milliseconds, a big change from the time of Firefox 3 when the difference was perceptible.

Features: As far as features are concerned, for all practical purposes, Firefox in its latest avatar is no less endowed than any other web browser out there. Mozilla has added a Private Browsing — aka porn mode — to the latest Firefox and when you toggle it, the browser stops accepting cookies (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_cookie) and doesn’t record history. Now before you get any ideas, let it be clear that by the virtues of IP address, you will still be visible on the web and leave your footprints wherever you wander. ;-)

Another notable new feature in Firefox 3.5 is the ability to respawn (http://www.computerhope.com/jargon/r/respawn.htm) closed windows. For tabs this feature was already available in the earlier version of Firefox, but with the added functionality, Firefox is now on par with other main browsers in the market. This is especially a boon to people like me who often accidently close tabs or windows.

The third much-touted feature of Firefox 3.5 is its location-aware browsing. Nowadays, many websites try to find out from where the user is coming and serve services based on their location. Google is a prime example of such sites. Mozilla claims that Firefox 3.5 “can tell websites where you’re located so you can find info that’s more relevant and more useful”. Of course, keeping in mind that not everybody may like to use the feature, location-aware browsing is optional.

In addition to other minor tweaks to bring features like Awesome Bar, Smart Bookmarks and ability to move tabs, Mozilla's coders have done some serious work under the hood to make Firefox 3.5 compatible with emerging web standards. Most notable among them is support for HTML 5, which if everything goes alright, may relegate plug-ins for Flash and Java to the dustbin.

Security: All modern web browsers, including Internet Explorer 8, are fairly secure with inbuilt protection against fishing and malicious websites and SSL support. But the browser-based security has its limitations because it depends on a list of blacklisted websites and does not provide real-time protection. That responsibility still falls on your anti-virus. Of course, when it comes to safety, Firefox trumps all the major browsers, but it is not because of Mozilla's coders but due to an amazing add-on called No Script that you can embed with the browser. Surfing with No Script active in background may not be a very pleasant experience — it effectively stops all scripts on a web page and you need to manually give permission to each one if you want to run them — but those who venture into the deep web know it is always advisable to use protection before taking the plunge.

After living with it for one week, I will say Firefox 3.5 is a significant upgrade for an awesome browser. The speed boost is much welcome and even though it lacks a couple of nice features like colour-coded tabs of IE8 and independent behaviour of tabs in Chrome, support for thousands of third-party add-ons more than makes up for its deficiencies. In fact, in the extremely competitive browser market where you can't differentiate much between IE8, Safari, Opera or Firefox in terms of features and functionalities, it is these add-ons which give the good old Fox an edge. Web surfing can often be very personal, and Firefox, aided by an active community that maintains innumerable add-ons for it, is still the only browser that gives end users a real shot at experiencing the web in a manner they feel is most appropriate. 