Rose is happy. Are you?

A text message woke me up early in the morning. "Delhi HC to give its order on homosexuality," read the message from my friend Rose, "We’re waiting—to protest or celebrate."

Rose, India's first transgender TV anchor and now a celebrity of the LGBT community, hasn't stopped celebrating.

Rose was born a ‘biological' male, but she soon realised that she is a female trapped in a male's body — a transgender. Baring her thoughts and dreams wasn’t easy; and when she finally did, she had to fight hard for them. When her parents realised that the ‘boy’s’ fascination for frocks was more than a curiosity, she was thrown out of her family — into a society which has never been kind to cross-dressers. And, yes, I mention Rose – and all those of the transgender community who want to be women – by the female pronoun. So, she is a she.
I first met Rose in March 2007, when I was working on a story on scientific sexual reassignment surgery (SRS). Rose, then undergoing what is known as Real Life Test in the US (where a transgender seeking a male-to-female sex change surgery is made to live like a female, even using the women’s rest room, before being given female hormones and then a series of surgeries to remove the penis and construct a vagina and breasts).

She was dressed as a woman. For some, it takes courage, for some other thick skin to cross dress. For Rose, it was sheer determination. I remember waiting for her in a low-income neighbourhood late in the evening. Since I wasn’t familiar with the labyrinthine alleys, she had asked me to wait on the main road. I saw Rose – a person of average male height and build – in a skirt and T shirt, with a cute vanity bag in hand, walking towards my car. Men sneered. As she got into my car, there were cat calls.

Soon after the Delhi high court order came on Thursday, I asked Rose what she felt that evening two years ago, and now. "People used to stare at me then," she said with measured indifference, "and people stare at me now. I don’t know if they used to stare at me with disdain then and with acceptance now." I didn’t ask more. The court may have made alternative sexuality legal, but a considerable section of the society may still find them outcasts (proof of which I expect in the form of nasty comments to this post).

Scientists have several theories of biochemistry, anatomy, psychology and even parapsychology to explain alternative sexuality. All I know is Rose is a transgender not to be a rebel. Through her, I know how difficult it is to be what you are, if you are a transgender: You are not wanted at home; you don’t get a decent job; you are in the middle of nowhere. Experiences of gays and lesbians could be less obvious, but equally traumatic.

Rose struggled (she stayed in an NGO’s office and did menial jobs) to be what she is today: A diploma holder in TV
direction; India’s first transgender talk show host (Ippadikku Rose, Vijay TV); World’s first transgender to direct, produce and anchor a TV show (Ithu Rose Neram, Kalaignar TV). Her celebrity status may have helped in restoring some normalcy in her life. Her family (father, mother, grandmother, two brothers and their wives) have "grudgingly" taken her back. Only her mother is yet to reconcile with her transgender status. Her grandmother says she loves her — and that she would’ve loved her more if she was a man.

"It's an end to so many years of mental agony," Rose says about her return home, as also the Delhi high court order. Rose is happy. Are you?