How much do 24 songs cost?

Twenty-four songs for $1.92 million! This is what Jammie Thomas, a single mother of four, has been asked to pay to record labels after a district court found her guilty of illegally downloading the songs from the Web. Last week, when I wrote that the struggle over file sharing is fast turning into a serious business even if we may not realize it and that the stakes are pretty high, this is exactly what I had in mind. The huge fine and the resulting outcry over the verdict is just the beginning because as technology mows down barriers around data distribution, the gulf between traditional content producers and consumers is only going to grow, bringing in its wake a protracted debate over the rights and wrongs in a digital age.

This case clearly shows where file sharers and record labels stand. “For the few existing cases, this verdict is a reminder of the clarity of the law,” said Cara Duckworth, a spokeswoman for the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). But it seems the RIAA people are being self-delusional again. The response from file sharers was not something that RIAA would like to see. As news of the $1.92 million fine spread on the Web, some folks at the infamous Pirate Bay collected the 24 songs, most likely from the internet itself, put them in a folder, made a torrent of it, and uploaded the torrent file to the Bay, calling it “the world's most expensive album”! Soon, this file was up at almost all major websites that maintain indexes of torrents and since June 18, when the verdict was delivered, the songs have been downloaded thousands of times, mostly in defiance.

This has been a pattern since Napster, the service that started it all in 1999, was shut down in 2001. Death of Napster did not finish music piracy. Once the record labels went after Napster, the pirates moved to more robust networks like Gnutella and eDonkey. When the heat reached these P2P networks, pirates shifted their bases to BitTorrent, an even more decentralized network. And, now that BitTorrent is in the crosshairs of record labels, they are regrouping themselves within private trackers and in some cases going back to Usenet.

Over the years the number of file-sharers has just grown. But instead of recognizing that there is something amiss in their market strategy, record labels have tried to ignore the ground realities. In the age of iPod, they hopelessly cling to CDs to make money. While the world is full of digital music players, we still don't have a decent online digital store for songs. Some will say that iTunes Store is there, but ask any self-respecting geek who loves his music and he will rant for hours how iTunes with its DRM and less-than-perfect music collection cannot provide the kind of experience that an audiophile seeks.

"When pirates enter our market spaces, we have two choices: We can throw lawsuits at them and hope they go away. Sometimes this is the best thing to do. But what if those pirates are adding value to society in some way? If these pirates are really doing something useful, people support them, and the strong arm of the law won't work. The pirates will keep coming back and multiplying no matter how many people are sued,” wrote Matt Mason, author of The Pirate's Dilemma: How Youth Culture Is Reinventing Capitalism. The last 10 years of struggle against file sharing ought to be an indication strong enough for RIAA that they are up against a monumental shift that technology has ushered in. Continuing to go after the file sharers, believing them to be some greedy nerds who love freebies, is not the right strategy to deal with the peculiarities of the digital age. Instead of spending its energy in tracking pirates, music industry ought to come out of its 20th century cocoon and start smelling the digital opportunities.